# 7/2/2024 and 7/3/2024

Today wrote the background of the README file, configured this project with GitHub, and wrote the basic skeleton of the program. More detailed notes on specific aspects can be found in the commit of the corresponding date.

# 7/15/2024

Today I added the main logic in for PIE, with alternating between adding and subtracting elements based on the modulo of the number of colors currently being tested. Scattered print statements to test the correct output of the code still remain. The binomial coefficents work as intended, but I realize I need to add recursion to avoid repeat cases. I noted in the code where this should happen. I'm going to brainstorm the best way to go about this, for now I'm unsure if I should rewrite the bulk of the code to make it more compatable with recursion, or if it's possible to keep this the same.

I also realized that some of my numbers may get to large to be stored as integers. This would be fine, but I still need to do calculations with these. I believe Python can handle this with long integers, but yet again with recursion my calls might take too long. As of now I only plan on calculating for 20x20 boards as a maximum, but 2^400 is too large for my calculator to handle, and 2^325 is already a 98 digit number... I am just now realizing a 20x20 board might even not be feasible. I suppose there's a reason no one else has done this! I think I'll be okay for the meantime; I'll finish the code, get the data I can, and I can work on another solution if I deem it necessary. 

# 7/16/2024

I need to come back with a fresh mind and rethink the layout of the program. For the recursion, is the base case c==i? I think it should be i==2, but based on how I set up the program I need to start with i=c and i-- rather than i=2 and i++. I've been messing with the code for about 2 hours but I'll get nowhere if I don't even know what the plan of attack is. I'll do some thinking on the side and come back to this.

# 7/17/2024

I had an epiphany last night and realized my error is with how I count the blank board. There are 16 ways to fill a 2x2 board with each square being blank or black, 2^4. But this also counts the board where none of the squares are colored, which we don't count as a valid board. In all other cases, take 3^4, each board must contain 2 different colors. So by defintion, the blank board doesn't hit the requirements for the base case. How I play with this idea is what is causing the error to be too large. I also noticed a few more bugs, but I can't really test and work those out until I fix this issue. I need to rework the base case and confirm that the binomial coefficents are calculated correctly. After that the bulk of the program should be done, and I just need to format how I want exports to the terminal in order to plan for integration with Excel. As always, notes are in the files with the corresponding date. I made distinct notes of where I went wrong last time.

# 7/21/2024

Major setbacks on Picross PIE. First of all, I realized the algorithm I was trying to implement incorrectly counts my grids. Oops! Lesson learned, next time triple check that you fully understand what you're trying to do before you do it. Secondly, IT issues. Out of an abundance of caution I'm not turning my laptop on to avoid issues with the Microsoft/Crowdstrike outage. This means I either code on my phone or don't at all. Unfortunately for me my WiFi decided to die, so I also have the hurdle of working off of spotty service. Hooray! I think I'm going to spend some time planning for other projects, although I do really want to complete this one. No updates to the actual code today. I will try to get back on track soon.

# 7/22/2024

My laptop is fine and the internet is back! I implemented the correct code this time and the 2x2 and 3x3 code is fully functional. In theory, any calculation above which the number of colors exceeds the number of tiles, the number of possbile grids is zero. This does not reflect correctly in my code. 2x2 with 71 colors gives an answer that is not zero. It also appears the 4x4 case might not be fully functional, because 4x4 with 25 colors should be zero, but I get a different answer. I confirmed the 10x10 2 and 3 color grids respond as intended. Somewhere the shear scale of how long the numbers are is bogging down the correct output. I'm not sure there is an answer to this question. I'm going to sift around the Python documentation to see if there's an easy workaround. I read that Python was supposed to automatically allocate to the correct data type, so my big data should be stored in long. Do I need to use a special operators to handle longs? Probably yes, but I would have expected an error rather than just the wrong output...

In the meantime, I did a little research how to export my data to Excel and it doesn't look that bad! I'm not sure I want to be doing that until I'm confident my code produces the correct output, but I might start to tinker with it anyway if I have the chance. If I can't make ground with either of those goals, I have another project in mind I might start experimenting with. As always, the commit to the corresponding date has the updated files.

# 7/23/2024

I resolved two issues today. First, the factorial_calc method was returning a float and Python floats cannot be arbitrarily large. I corrected this and pushed a commit, but calculations with more that 58 colors produced an error. I poked around how to correct this, and realized that I can just use math.comb for the binomial coefficent, which doesn't have this error. a 20x20 grid with 402 colors correctly results in 0 possible grids. 50x50 with 2502 colors also correctly calculates to 0 possible grids. Even 100x100 with 10002 colors correctly returns 0 possible grids! We run into issues with trying to print more than 4300 digits, like in the case of 50x50 with 1000 colors, but as of now I don't plan on counting this high. I think 20x20 should suffice, but I'll increase the limit if necessary.

I now need to get the data into Excel and consider how I want to do calculations. I believe I want to take the largest output for each size and label it 100%, and then graph all the colors on one grid to see what each curve looks like, and after see what percentage out of the whole number of iterations does the curve turn downwards. I'm not sure if Excel has something like this built in, but I'll do some research on the best way to go about this before I start to implement it. I'm also slightly concerned about Excel limits on how large of numbers can be stored. I think after all the calculations I can convert the answer to scientific notation with no major accuracy concerns. 

I may make minor changes to PIE.py for compatability with Excel, but I don't believe there will be many more changes to that file. FactorialTest.py was just for experimenting with the binomial coefficent calculation and will be removed shortly. I plan on adding a new file for Excel outputs and iterating that process. Current progress can be viewed in the commit with today's date.

# 7/28/2024

I shouldn't have any issues with data size in Excel because a cell can contain about 32,000 characters and I'm working with less than 4,300. I do need to add some methods for formatting the data in Excel the way I want it. I already got a method to caluclate for the x-axis. I want that to mark the percent current color iterations are at, so I take c/size *100 to get the percentage. To calculate the highest percent from the list of outcomes I need to find the maximum output which shouldn't be too much of a challenge, just a couple of if statements. I then need to mark that index as 100% and take the results of the other outputs / the highest output *100 to get the rest of them. I created a new method calc_percentage for calculating the current percent of colors. I don't know why but trying to make an iterator to run through all of one size grid isn't working. I think I'm missing something obvious. I made no changes to union_size, so somehow PIE_iterator is interfering. I need to have this correct before I can work on finding the max, so looks like I'm going to try again tomorrow. I made two commits today. The first one is functional the second one is a WIP state.

# 7/29/2024

Somehow total being a global variable messed up the automated case. One of the things I tested was resetting total to zero within PIE_iterator but it didn't resolve the problem. Somewhere else total was being accessed?? It's a mystery but the iteration works now. 

Excel integration time! I will be using pandas to print one column at a time into Excel. I wrote a method to apend all found values into lists, and from there pandas and numpy should be able to get it into Excel. I'm not sure the best way to organize my methods across files so I'm kinda winging it right now. I have a loose structure and a general idea of when to call add_to_lists (inside PIE_iterator) but I'm not completely sure on where to calculate the y-axis number. I need to take the possibleboards/max *100, and this is possible with another while loop, but not great for time complexity. I think that's just something I have to come to terms with. I feel like I'm starting to lose focus so I'm calling it for today.

# 7/30/2024

I (suprisingly) correctly implemented adding elements to the lists first try! It really was as simple as running PIE_iterator twice. There's no other way to find the max as far as I'm aware, so we can't avoid this case. In terms of the lists, I don't think I'll need to make the lists global. I can write another loop to run each size board if I want to, to avoid putting in size of boards each time. I still need to hook to an Excel file and spew the outputs onto it, but after that it's just analyzing the outputs. I'm going to push a commit and then continue testing to make sure everything truly is okay.

I added on some stuff to export the data to Excel. 11x11 board works successfully but a 15x15 fails (I don't know about 12x12 - 14x14 ranges yet). For the 2x2, 10x10, and 11x11 grids the data looks correct. I saved the 10x10 workbook as you can see attached to this commit. With the 15x15 case I get a long error message but the helpful hint appears to be "OverflowError: int too large to convert to float". So I thought I needed to truncate or round all possible percentages. This was not the answer. I think the number of possible boards is too large, so if I send this to Excel already in scientific notation it should respond as expected. The next step after this will be to write a loop to send all 20 boards to Excel in one go. Then I can get what I want as my final graph for this program. I didn't end up using Excel.py and instead wrote all the code in PIE.py. There's more notes about next steps and potiental issues in today's commit too.

# 8/16/2024

After a long break I decided to take a look back on this program. I was thinking that implementing the two final steps might be a pain, but it actually looks not that bad. I wrote a function to convert the final answer to scientific notation for excel. It doesn't respond as I expected for the Y-axis, but I think I just didn't call it in the right spot. The only caveat is that scientific notation is not very readable to the human eye. The program currently prints 15 as 1.5000E1. I could write an if statement to ignore small numbers, but then this complciates conversion in excel. There may be an answer but this will do as for my purposes. Continuing to investigate.

Yup y-axis was me just goofing. I'm not sure why my function is giving an error though. Whatever I wrote can't handle extremely large numbers, (which was the whole idea of the function. to prevent PANDAS from giving that same error) so I'm going to take some time to think up a solution. On a seperate note, PANDAS is passing a string to excel, not numbers. It's super quick to highlight the cells and ignore this error, and the graphs between scientific notation being used or not used are indistinguishable. Once I resolve this error and write one more method the code will be complete. Then into phase 2, creating a working Picross game to test uniqueness. 

# 8/18/2024 

I fixed the scientific notation so now up to at least 20x20 grids can be calculated by this program. I may override this limit to get larger grids if I want to further demonstrate my findings or if I need more data. I also wrote the final function to calculate nxn grids from 1 to 20 and export all the data to excel in one go. From the excel data, it looks like 72 is our number. At 72% of the possible colors the grid has as many solutions as possible. I need to research the significance of this and see if I can tie it to anyone else's findings. Afterward I'm going to type up all the details of what this data shows and begin the second phase of the project. I may push one more commit for cleanup but as of now, the logic is complete.